Document Service Maturity (#12)
appuio/cloud-kubernetes-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/service-maturity.adoc

That in turn also means we must allow some leeway for each Managed Kubernetes service in respect to the requirements, should a service not allow for a feature or makes it overly complex.
A Managed Kubernetes service is allowed to deviate from a requirement when it makes sense and can be documented and reasoned about accordingly.

To understand the personas referenced in this document, see xref:references/glossary.adoc#_personas[Glossary - Personas].

== Initial Release: Cluster Provisioning

As an *End-User* I can:

* provision a Cloud Kubernetes environment on our supported Cloud Service Providers, fully self-service.
* connect to the Cloud Kubernetes API for using it.
* customize my cluster with a pre-defined set of features and components.
** scale my cluster horizontally and vertically, as my needs change.
** choose the https://products.docs.vshn.ch/products/service_levels.html[service level^] of the instance.
* delete the Cloud Kubernetes environment again.

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

* see and configure the https://products.docs.vshn.ch/products/service_levels.html[service level^] of the instance.

> * automatically bill the service to the end-user according to the specified price model.

Reviewer: Maybe that is a role on its own? A _Technical VSHNeer_ actually does not necessarily care about billing (at least not directly). It is actually VSHN as a whole that needs this.

Author: You're right. Coming up with another Persona is something I'd like to invest a bit more time and for the time being, leave it as it is. Once we fine-tuned to personas, we can adapt it here as well.

* receive notifications in advance of any scheduled maintenance, allowing me to plan accordingly and to minimize any disruption to my applications.

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

* monitor the status of the Cloud Kubernetes environment during the maintenance window, to ensure that the maintenance is operating as expected.

== Iteration: Cluster Version Upgrade

As an *End-User* I can:

* schedule an automated upgrade of my Cloud Kubernetes environment to the next minor version.

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

* trigger an automated upgrade of the Cloud Kubernetes environment to the next minor version.

== Iteration: Cluster Backup and Restore

As an *End-User* I can:

* rely on automated backups of my Cloud Kubernetes environment configuration and cluster state.
* schedule backups cluster state backups to run automatically, at a time and frequency that suits my needs.
* configure data retention policies to ensure that backups are kept for the desired length of time.
* quickly and easily restore my Cloud Kubernetes environment to a previous state, including all cluster configuration.

> * test restores in a test environment before performing a full restore, to ensure that the backup is fully restorable.

Reviewer: That is a real tough one. It probably needs clarification of scope. This can read as _restore a cluster along with everything deployed on it_. Just a few points where this might go wrong:

* PVs can only be bound to one cluster or might not be available anymore
* Deployments might reference external resources (S3, Cloud databases, APIs). So the copy of an application might start to fight about state with the actual production one)
* And probably a lot more

Author: I strongly agree. I'd even say: Let's remove that one for now, it could make this iteration into a state where it isn't possible to get it done without a huge amount of effort.

Author: I removed that line now.

== Iteration: Cluster-Level Metrics and Alerting

As an *End-User* I can:

* access a metrics dashboard to get an overview of the Cloud Kubernetes environment and health.

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

* have a metrics service that will help me keep track of the health and performance of the Cloud Kubernetes environment.
* enable alerting on pre-defined SLIs to VSHN so that VSHN can resolve incidents with priority.
* see SLO reports so that I can get an overview of how well my Cloud Kubernetes environment performs.
* access operations runbooks so that I can resolve upcoming alerts.
* access a metrics dashboard to get an overview of the Cloud Kubernetes environment and health.

== Iteration: End-User Metrics and Alerting

As an *End-User* I can:

> * enable a service to automatically collect and aggregate metrics from my Cloud Kubernetes environment and applications, providing a unified view of all metrics.

Reviewer: This looks like a duplication of line 69. But I guess the difference is one cluster vs several clusters. For the latter, I wonder if this is a feature of Cloud Kubernetes or a product on its own that can be used by everything VSHN provides?

Author: The differences between this line and line 69 is the context: Line 69 is in the "Cluster-Level Metrics" context and that one in the "End-User Metrics" context. Comparing that to OpenShift would mean: Here we're talking about the "User Workload Monitoring" feature and in line 69 about the standard cluster monitoring. Do you see anything which we could rephrase so that this gets more clear?

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to maybe change the name of the iteration to "Applications Metrics and Alerting". In addition to what @corvus-ch mentioned, and as mentioned also before, I think that this could also be a product on its own.

Author: Yes, I agree, I renamed the iteration. For now, I'd like to keep it here as this is an important aspect for an end-user of the product, and I'm pretty sure we have to offer that by default not as an add-on.

* have metrics visualized in real-time, with interactive charts and graphs, providing insights into the behavior and performance of my Cloud Kubernetes environment and the applications.
* configure alarms to alert me when specific conditions are met, such as when an application experiences an error.
* create custom dashboards to view metrics that are most important to me, and to quickly identify areas of concern.

== Iteration: Cluster Autoscaling

As an *End-User* I can:

* enable autoscaling of the cluster so that new worker nodes get added when needed and removed again when not needed anymore.
* define a lower and upper bound of the amount of worker nodes.
* specify what kind of worker nodes are part of the autoscaling.

== Iteration: Logs

As an *End-User* I can:

* enable collection of historic logs of my applications running on the cluster.
* access historic logs of my application running on the cluster.
* configure retention time of historic logs.

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

> * access the logs of the Kubernetes control plane via a user-friendly interface.

Reviewer: Nice _user-friendly_ is only relevant for VSHNeers but is not mentioned for end-users 🤣

Author: That wasn't the intention, and slipped through my fingers. I'd remove "user-friendly" here, as this is not a well-defined wording. What does "user-friendly" actually mean? Define "user-friendly"...

Reviewer 2: Maybe instead of user-friendly interface we can write "access the logs of the Kubernetes control plane via a UI dashboard" or "via an intereactive dashboard". What do you think about that? 

And on that note, we wrote it a bit differently for the End-User ("access historic logs...") - maybe we can also edit this sentence for the End-User? i.e to add at the end of this sentence the "via a UI dashboard" or "via an intereactive dashboard".

Another thing I think we should consider: do we want to have a feature for the End-User application mentioned here as well or if we decide it will be a standalone product, then maybe we should remove it from this iteration?

Author: Good input, I rephrased it accordingly.

* configure retention time of historic logs.

== Iteration: Service Exposure

As an *End-User* I can:

* expose services to the Internet using the `Ingress` Kubernetes objects.
* expose services using the Kubernetes service type `LoadBalancer` in order to access it from outside the cluster (for example from the Internet).

== Iteration: TLS Certificate Handling

As an *End-User* I can:

* order and consume TLS certificates which are renewed automatically.
* use `Ingress` Kubernetes objects with fully automated certificate handling.

== Iteration: Persistent Storage

As an *End-User* I can:

* request and consume RWX (Read-Write-Many) or RWO (Read-Write-Once) storage types.
* order storage without having to specify a storage class.

== Iteration: Authentication

As an *End-User* and *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

* log in to my cluster through a user-friendly interface

== Iteration: Networking

As a *Technical VSHNeer* I can:

> * choose from a pre-defined list of CNI plugins.

Reviewer: Does the decision to only use Cilium only apply to OpenShift?

Author: The idea was to not specify the exact CNI in this document, but in another "pre-defined list of CNI plugins", which then will state that Cilium is the default.

With "feature complete" it's not meant that the service doesn't receive new functionality or doesn't get maintained anymore, we're talking about the default scope outlined on this page.

Important is that every step is independent of each other. A service that implements `Backup and Restore` doesn't necessarily already implement `Logs`.
That in turn also means we must allow some leeway for each service in respect to the requirements, should a service not allow for a feature or makes it overly complex.
A service is allowed to deviate from a requirement when it makes sense and can be documented and reasoned about accordingly.

TODO! To understand the personas referenced in this document, see xref:reference/glossary.adoc#_personas[Glossary - Personas].

TODO! We currently maintain the service maturity assessment for each service on our product documentation site under https://products.docs.vshn.ch/products/appuio/managed/services_index.html[VSHN Application Catalog -> Services^].

== Initial Release: Cluster Provisioning

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

Provisioning::

> I can provision a production-ready cloud Kubernetes environment on a major cloud service provider, such as Amazon EKS, Azure AKS, Google GKE, Exsoscale SKS (on request) and Swisscom ESC (on request).

Author: ```suggestion
I can provision a Cloud Kubernetes environment on our supported Cloud Service Provider.
```

I'd leave "production-ready" out here, it's unclear what this actually means. Maintaining the list of support Cloud Service Providers shouldn't be done here, instead it's part of products.docs.

Author: Oh, and we have to bring in the "self-service" aspect here somehow.

Reviewer 2: For us (colin & Hadar) it is clear it is a self-service. because it is referring to the End User capabilities.

Author: Always be explicit in such documents, don't make assumption. For me, it wasn't clear, and therefore I strongly suggest being precise. That's why I propose to bring the self-service aspect into it, as this is one of the most important pillars of the product.

Scalability::

> I can easily scale my cluster as my needs change, without any downtime or disruption to my services.

Author: Do we already want that in the provisioning iteration? Or should that be its own iteration ("Autoscaling")? Or should we clearly exclude autoscaling here to make it clear that we're not talking about that?

Reviewer 2: Do we want to add more info regarding the autoscalling here in the service maturity or should we leave it out and add it only to the product description? (as we also said we would like to shorten the service maturity list..)

Author: As autoscaling is an important aspect of the product, I propose we add a section especially for that topic.

Customization::

> I can customize my cluster with the features and components I need to run my workloads.

Author: Maybe say:

```suggestion
I can customize my cluster with a pre-defined set of features and components.
```

Security::
The service is built with security in mind and includes features such as encrypted communication, role-based access control (RBAC), and more to help me protect my data and workloads.

Technical support::

> I can receive technical support from Kubernetes experts, who can help me resolve any issues or questions I may have, according to my SLA.

Author: ```suggestion
I can receive technical support from Kubernetes experts, who can help me resolve any issues or questions I may have, according to my chosen xref:https://products.docs.vshn.ch/products/support_plans.html[Support Plan].
```

> == Iteration: Cluster Maintainence

Author: ```suggestion
== Iteration: Cluster Maintenance
```

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

Scheduling::

> I can schedule maintenance windows for my cloud Kubernetes environment, during which updates, patches, or other changes can be applied automatically.

Author: ```suggestion
I can schedule maintenance windows for my Cloud Kubernetes environment, during which updates, patches, or other changes can be applied automatically.
```

Notifications::
I can receive notifications in advance of any scheduled maintenance, allowing me to plan accordingly and to minimize any disruption to my applications.

Automated Updates::

> The service will automatically apply updates and patches to my cloud Kubernetes environment, ensuring that it is always running the latest and most secure version of the software.

Author: ```suggestion
The service will automatically apply updates and patches to my Cloud Kubernetes environment, ensuring that it is always running the latest and most secure version of the software.
```

Monitoring::

> I can monitor the status of my cloud Kubernetes environment during the maintenance window, to ensure that the maintenance is operating as expected.

Author: ```suggestion
I can monitor the status of my Cloud Kubernetes environment during the maintenance window, to ensure that the maintenance is operating as expected.
```

== Iteration: Cluster Upgrade

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

Upgrade::

> I can upgrade my cloud Kubernetes clusters minor version.

Author: ```suggestion
I can upgrade my Cloud Kubernetes clusters minor version.
```

Maybe rephrase into "I can schedule an automated upgrade of my Cloud Kubernetes cluster to the next minor version".

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Upgrade::

> I can upgrade my cloud Kubernetes clusters minor version.

Author: Regarding the above suggestion:

```suggestion
I can trigger an automated upgrade of my Cloud Kubernetes cluster to the next minor version
```

== Iteration: Backup and Restore

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

> Data backup::

Author: ```suggestion
Cluster configuration backup::
```

> I can create backups of my cloud Kubernetes environment, including the configuration, state, and data of my applications.

Author: ```suggestion
I can rely on automated backups of my Cloud Kubernetes cluster configuration and state
```

In APPUiO Managed, we don't care about the data of the end-users applications running on the cluster. We only care about the cluster itself and provide means for the end-user to do application backup, aka we provide a well-configured K8up.

Author: Add a part "Application data backup::"

Reviewer 2: We thought about it again and we think that there is no need to add the "Application data backup" here as this is a service that will be provided by AppCat, as the ownership of K8up is at AppCat.

Author: Maybe that's true, but I'm not sure about it, because I think providing some application supporting functionality is part of the platform. Let's discuss that.

Scheduling::
I can schedule backups to run automatically, at a time and frequency that suits my needs.

Data retention::
I can configure data retention policies to ensure that backups are kept for the desired length of time.

Restore::
In the event of a failure, I can quickly and easily restore my cloud Kubernetes environment to a previous state, including all configuration, state, and data.

Testing::
I can test restores in a development environment before performing a full restore, to ensure that my data and applications are fully recoverable.

== Iteration: Monitoring and Alerting

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

> * I can have a monitoring service that will help me keep track of the health and performance of my cloud Kubernetes environment.

Author: ```suggestion
* I have a monitoring service that will help me keep track of the health and performance of my cloud Kubernetes environment.
```

Reviewer 2: As discussed in the meeting we had, we agreed to keep its as it is and not change "can" to "have". so we leave it as it is right now.

> * I can enable alerting on pre-defined SLIs to VSHN so that VSHN can resolve incidents with priority.

Author: ```suggestion
* I have alerting on pre-defined SLIs to VSHN so that VSHN can resolve incidents with priority.
```

Reviewer 2: As discussed in the meeting we had, we agreed to keep its as it is and not change "can" to "have". so we leave it as it is right now.

Collection::
The service will automatically collect and aggregate metrics from my cloud Kubernetes environment and applications, providing a unified view of all metrics.

Visualization::
Metrics can be visualized in real-time, with interactive charts and graphs, providing insights into the behavior and performance of my cloud Kubernetes environment and the applications.

Alarming::
I can set up alarms to alert me when specific conditions are met, such as when an application experiences an error.

Custom dashboards::
I can create custom dashboards to view metrics that are most important to me, and to quickly identify areas of concern.

== Iteration: Billing / Service

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

SLA::
I can request a change for the SLA of my cloud Kubernetes environment

Costs::
I can view and access my running costs of the cloud Kubernetes environment

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

SLA::
When a request for changing the SLA of a Kubernetes environment is approved, I can change the SLA.

SLA::
I can view the SLA of a Kubernetes environment per customer and per cluster

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Automated Billing::
The service instances are automatically billed according to the defined price model.
```

== Iteration: Logs

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

Cluster Logs::
I can access the logs of the Kubernetes control plane via a user-friendly interface

Application Logs::
I can access the logs of my applications via a user-friendly interface

Log retention::

> I can configure the retention of the logs in the cloud provider's logging stack

Author: ```suggestion
I can configure the retention of the logs in the provided logging stack
```

Reviewer 2: Was not added at the end, as we deleted all information about the logs, except for the Cluster Logs.

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Cluster Logs::
I can access the logs of the Kubernetes control plane via a user-friendly interface

> == Iteration: Ingress Controller

Author: ```suggestion
== Iteration: Service Exposure
```

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

> Route traffic::
> I can define rules to route incoming traffic to specific services based on the URL path, host, or other criteria.
> 
> Load balancing::
> I can configure the Ingress Controller to load balance incoming traffic across multiple replicas of my services to improve reliability and performance.
> 
> SSL/TLS termination::
> I can configure the Ingress Controller to terminate SSL/TLS connections and handle encryption/decryption of incoming traffic, making it easier to secure my services.
> 
> Custom configuration::
> I can customize the behavior of the Ingress Controller by providing custom configuration files, such as custom error pages or redirect rules.

Author: Maybe combine this into:

```suggestion
Ingress Controller::
I have a modern Ingress controller available to expose my applications using the `Ingress` object.
```

(Or even "using the `Ingress` and more modern Gateway API").

Monitoring and logging::
I can monitor and log incoming traffic through the Ingress Controller, helping me to track traffic patterns and identify issues.

Monitoring::
I can monitor the expiration of my certificates

> 

Reviewer 2: We suggest to delete it from this Iteration, as every component can be monitored and we can mention it at the Monitoring Iteration.

Author: I agree that one doesn't really fit here. It would probably be a better fit for "User Workload Monitoring" which I'm unsure if this is yet another iteration or an additional component / add-on with its own features and iterations.

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Monitoring and logging::

> I can monitor and log incoming traffic through the Ingress Controller, helping me to track potential problems of the Ingress Controller

Reviewer 2: We suggest to delete it from this Iteration, as every component can be monitored and we can mention it at the Monitoring Iteration.

Author: Agreed :+1:

Custom configuration::
I can customize the behavior of the Ingress Controller by providing custom configuration files, such as global defaults for certain timeouts

> == Iteration: Cert Manager

Author: ```suggestion
== Iteration: Automated Certificate Handling
```

Author: This section reads like a feature list of what Cert Manager does. I'm uncertain if this provides any value to the user. It could probably make sense to have a higher level list stating that we provide a pre-configured "Cert Manager" and other components?

> 

Reviewer 2: We suggest to delete it from this Iteration, as every component can be customized and since we suggested to remove also the monitoring part, we suggest to delete the entire section of "as a VSHNeer Engineer".

Author: Yes, I agree, I'd remove that section as well. We can always iterate over it as we learn.

== Iteration: Login (Authentication)

As a user of the service I can perform the following actions:

Cluster login::
I can log in to my cluster through a user-friendly interface 

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Cluster login::
I can log in to my cluster through a user-friendly interface 

== Iteration: Cluster Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Role definition::
I can define roles that specify the permissions a user or group of users should have within their cluster, including the ability to create, update, and delete resources.

Role binding::
I can bind roles to users or groups of users, effectively granting them the specified permissions.

Role management::
I can manage my roles and role bindings using Kubernetes APIs, allowing me to dynamically control access to their cluster and its resources.

Cluster-level RBAC::
I can enforce Cluster RBAC at the cluster level, ensuring that all users and groups have the appropriate permissions and access to their cluster and its resources.

Namespace-level RBAC::

> I can enforce RBAC at the namespace level, allowing me to define different access policies for different parts of their cluster.

Author: Remove that section, it currently doesn't add any value.

== Iteration: Container Network Interface (CNI)

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Network plugin selection::

> I can choose from a variety of VSHN supported CNI plugins

Author: Do we really want that? I'd stick with one default CNI.

> I can choose from a variety of VSHN supported CNI plugins

Author: ```suggestion
I can choose from a pre-defined list of VSHN supported CNI plugins
```

Network customization::

> I can customize the network configuration to meet the specific needs of the user's workloads and applications, such as specifying network segmentation, IP address ranges, and other network-level attributes.

Author: I propose to have a clearly defined list of things which can be customized.

Network security::
I can use CNI plugins to enforce network security policies, such as firewalls, network segmentation, and network access controls, helping me to ensure the security of the user's applications and data.

Network performance::
I can use CNI plugins to optimize network performance for the user's workloads and applications

== Iteration: LoadBalancer

As an engineer of the service I can perform the following actions:

Load balancing setup::

> I can set up load balancing for the applications and services, using the Ingress-Controller. This allows me to define how incoming traffic to the applications should be routed and balanced, ensuring that the users have a seamless and reliable experience.

Author: Are we talking about the Service type `LoadBalancer` in this section? If you, what role does the Ingress controller play here?
